Personality Disorders

_Preface (Syn Ch6):
1. Personality disorders are characterized by deeply engrained, generally lifelong maladaptive patterns of behavior that are usually recognizable at adolescence or earlier.


_Brief close-up Introduction:
(Syn Ch22)
-General Personality Disorder: An enduring pattern of behavior and inner experiences that deviates significantly from the individual's cultural standards; is rigidly pervasive; has an onset in adolescence or early adulthood; is stable through time; leads to unhappines and impairment; and manifests in at least 2 of the following 4 areas: cognition, affectivity, interpersonal function, or impulse control.
-When Personality traits are rigid and maladaptive and produce functional impairment or subjective distress, a PD is diagnosed.


Cluster A: Odd and aloof features (Syn Ch22)
(Syn Ch6)
1. Paranoid Personality Disorder: is characterized by unwarranted suspicion, hypersensitivity, jealousy, envy, rigidity, excessive self-importance, and a tendency to blame and ascribe evil motives to others.
2. Schizoid Personality Disorder: is characterized by shyness, oversensitivity, seclusiveness, avoidance of close or competitive relationships, eccentricity, no loss of capacity to recognize reality, daydreaming and an ability to express hostility and aggression.
3. Schizotypal Personality Disorder: is similar to schizoid personality, but the person also exhibits slight losses of reality testing, has odd beliefs, and is aloof and withdrawn.

Cluster B: Dramatic, Impulsive and erratic features (Syn Ch22)
(Syn Ch6)
4. Histrionic Personality Disorder: is characterized by emotional instability, excitability, over-reactivity, vanity, immaturity, dependency, and self-dramatization that is attention seeking and seductive.
5. Antisocial Personality Disorder: covers persons in conflict with society. They are incapable of loyalty, selfish, callous, irresponsible, impulsive, and unable to feel guilt or learn from experiences; they have low levels of frustration tolerance and a tendency to blame others.
6. Narcissistic Personality Disorder: is characterized by grandiose feelings, a sense of entitlement, a lack of empathy, envy and a tendency to blame others.
7. Borderline Personality Disorder: is characterized by instability, impulsiveness, chaotic sexuality, suicidal acts, self-mutilating behavior, identity problems, ambivalence, and feeling of emptiness and boredom.

Cluster C: anxious and fearful features (Syn Ch22)
(Syn Ch6)
8. Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder (OCPD): is characterized by excessive concern with conformity and standards of conscience; the individual may be rigid, overconscientious, overdutiful, overinhibited, and unable to relax (three Ps - punctual, parsimonius and precise).
9. Avoidant Personality Disorder: is characterized by low levels of energy, easy fatigability, lack of enthusiasm, inability to enjoy life and oversensitivity to stress.
10. Dependent Personality Disorder:is characterized by passive and submissive behavior; the person is unsure of himself or herself and becomes entirely dependent on others.

Personality Changes Due to Another Medical Condition: This category includes alterations to a personality due to a medical condition (e.g, brain tumor).
Unspecified Personality Disorder: This category involves other personality traits that do not fit any of the patterns described above.

_Epidemiology:
(Syn Ch22)
-Personality disorders occur in 10 to 20 percent of the general population.
-Approximately %50 of all psychiatric patients have a personality disorder, which is frequently comorbid with other clinical syndromes.
-Personality disorder is also a predisposing factor for other psychiatric disordrs (e.g, substance use, suicide, affective disorders, impulse-control disorders, eating disorders, and anxiety disorders) in which it interferes with treatment outcomes of many clinical syndromes and increases personal incapacitation, morbidity, and mortality of these patients.

_Notes:
(Syn Ch22)
-Persons with personality disorders are far more likely to refuse psychiatric help and to deny their problems than persons with anxiety disorders, depressive disorder or OCD.
-In general, personality disorder symptoms are ego syntonic (i.e, acceptable to the ego, as opposed to ego dystonic) and alloplastic (i.e, adapt by trying to alter the external environment rather than themselves).
-Persons with PD do not feel anxiety about their maladaptive behavior.
-Individuals frequently exhibit traits that are not limited to a single PD.